---
bad_links:
aliases: []
tags: [compilers]
---
# Linker

A **Linker** is a computer program that takes one or more [[Object Files|object files]] generated by a compiler and combines them into a single executable program. Computer programs are usually made of multiple modules that can be compiled separately, and linkers play a crucial role in combining these modules into a unified whole.

Compiling and Linking are two separate steps. Even if a file does not have a main() function, the compiler will not error if everything else is correct. That is because defining the main() entry point is the job of the linker. The linking process involves resolving references to external symbols, assigning absolute addresses to the symbols, and adjusting the code and data in the [[Object Files.md|object files]] accordingly. The linker may handle different types of symbols and their resolutions:

1. **External Symbols**: Symbols defined in other modules or libraries. The linker ensures that all external calls within the object files find the correct addresses of functions or variables defined in other compiled files or libraries.
2. **Static Symbols**: These are local to a file and are not visible outside unless explicitly stated. The linker does not need to resolve these symbols externally.
3. **Unresolved Symbols**: Sometimes, during compilation, a symbol is used but not defined. These symbols must either be resolved during linking by finding the appropriate object file or library containing the definition, or they will result in a linking error.

The linker also handles tasks such as library linking. Libraries can be static or dynamic:

- **Static Libraries** are archives of object files which are incorporated into the executable. This results in larger executable files, but the advantage is that all necessary code is contained within the executable itself, removing the need for external dependencies at runtime.

- **Dynamic Libraries**, on the other hand, are not included in the executable. Instead, links are provided which are resolved to the actual library at runtime. This method reduces the size of the executable and allows the sharing of common library code among different programs.

The process of linking can dramatically affect the size, performance, and dependencies of the resulting executable. Optimization during this stage can involve:

- **Symbol Resolution Optimization**: Minimizing the number of required external symbols by optimizing the code.
- **Dead Code Elimination**: Removing code that is never called or used, which can decrease the size of the resulting executable.
- **Address Binding**: Efficient assignment of addresses to reduce lookup times and improve runtime performance.

In summary, the linker is a key component of the software development process, transforming compiled modules into a ready-to-run program by resolving symbol references, combining multiple object files, and integrating libraries accordingly. Engaging effectively with linkers requires understanding their options and behavior, which can vary significantly across different operating systems and development environments.